docs/_getting-started/migration-guide.md, before:

---
title: Migration Guide
nav_order: 3
---

# Migration Guide

## Migrating from Tailwind CSS

### Class Names

Tailwind CSS uses `-` (dash) to separate words in class names, while Whirlwind uses `camelCasing`:

| Tailwind CSS | Whirlwind  |
| ------------ | ---------- |
| border-t-2   | t.borderT2 |

This also affects directional attributes, which become capitalized:

| Tailwind CSS | Whirlwind |
| ------------ | --------- |
| pt-4         | t.pT4     |

A `-` (dash) at the beginning of a class (e.g. indicating a negative margin) becomes a `_` (underscore):

| Tailwind CSS | Whirlwind |
| ------------ | --------- |
| -mt-4        | t.\_mT4   |

A `.` (period/decimal point) and `/` (forward/fraction slash) in numbers become `_` (underscore) as well:

| Tailwind CSS | Whirlwind |
| ------------ | --------- |
| m-0.5        | t.m0_5    |
| w-3/6        | t.w3_6    |

### Special Note on `react-native-tailwindcss`

Migration from `react-native-tailwindcss` to `react-native-whirlwind` is very straightforward as most of the class names are compatible between both frameworks.

### Colors

Whirlwind does not define the same colors as Tailwind CSS. Instead of offering various hues of red, blue, green, etc., Whirlwind uses semantic color names:

- `primary`
- `secondary`
- `link`
- `info`
- `success`
- `error`
- `warning`
- `disabled`

| Tailwind CSS   | Whirlwind       |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| text-{color}   | t.text{Color}   |
| bg-{color}     | t.bg{Color}     |
| border-{color} | t.border{Color} |

Refer to the [Colors](./colors.md) page for more information.

Commit message:

Prepare for v0.1.0-beta.2
- Reworked color scheme and added different shades (`light`, `dark`) and a `contrast` variant
- Default palette is based on [Material UI](https://material-ui.com/)
- Reorganized the documentation for better clarity

docs/_getting-started/migration-guide.md, after:

---
title: Migration Guide
nav_order: 3
---

# Migration Guide

## Migrating from Tailwind CSS

### Class Names

Tailwind CSS uses `-` (dash) to separate words in class names, while Whirlwind uses `camelCasing`:

| Tailwind CSS | Whirlwind  |
| ------------ | ---------- |
| border-t-2   | t.borderT2 |

This also affects directional attributes, which become capitalized:

| Tailwind CSS | Whirlwind |
| ------------ | --------- |
| pt-4         | t.pT4     |

A `-` (dash) at the beginning of a class (e.g. indicating a negative margin) becomes a `_` (underscore):

| Tailwind CSS | Whirlwind |
| ------------ | --------- |
| -mt-4        | t.\_mT4   |

A `.` (period/decimal point) and `/` (forward/fraction slash) in numbers become `_` (underscore) as well:

| Tailwind CSS | Whirlwind |
| ------------ | --------- |
| m-0.5        | t.m0_5    |
| w-3/6        | t.w3_6    |

### Special Note on `react-native-tailwindcss`

Migration from `react-native-tailwindcss` to `react-native-whirlwind` is very straightforward as most of the class names are compatible between both frameworks.

### Colors

Whirlwind does not define the same colors as Tailwind CSS. Instead of offering various hues of red, blue, green, etc., Whirlwind uses semantic color names:

- `primary`
- `secondary`
- `link`
- `info`
- `success`
- `error`
- `warning`
- etc.

Every color comes in three different shades (the default, `light`, and `dark`), and a `contrast` variant.

To replace your existing Tailwind CSS colors, choose an adequate semantic color from this list and replace the color name in your style with the new one:

| Tailwind CSS   | Whirlwind       |
| -------------- | --------------- |
| text-{color}   | t.text{Color}   |
| bg-{color}     | t.bg{Color}     |
| border-{color} | t.border{Color} |

Refer to the [Colors](../core-concepts/colors) page for more information.
